# Kobold Biology

1. [Anatomy](#anatomy)
   1. [Basic Appearance](#basic-appearance)
   1. [Senses](#senses)
   1. [Scales & Coloration](#scales--coloration)
   1. [Reproductive Organs](#reproductive-organs)
   1. [Dewlap](#dewlap)
   1. [Cerata](#cerata)
1. [Physiology](#physiology)
   1. [Locomotion & Other Movement](#locomotion--other-movement)
   1. [Nutrition & Diet](#nutrition--diet)
   1. [Gestation & Development](#gestation--development)
   1. [Disease](#disease)


## Anatomy

### Basic Appearance

Kobolds are a small species of people who are lizard- and bird-like. They are
typically about 4 feet tall, with a variance of ±6 inches being common (though
there is a rare genetic abnormality that causes some to grow to heights more in
the 5 to 6 foot range).

They have faces with pronounced snouts like many lizards. Their nostrils and
eyes are large for their head size compared to most other sentients. Eye color
commonly can range from dark brown to golden, blue, green and yellow. They lack
external ears, also like lizards, having small ear holes on the sides of their
heads.

Kobolds have sharp cutting teeth in the front of their mouths (these are much
sharper than the cutting teeth of mammalian sentients) and crushing teeth at the
rear of their mouths. They have a wide, muscly tongue with a notch near the end
which typically ranges in color from black through grey to bright blue.

They have two arms, two legs and a long, thick tail. They are typically slender
and have a very low body fat percentage with their tail accounting for 30-45% of
their body mass. Their bones are of a weight and density typical for other
slender sentients their size: closer to goblin bones than dwarf bones.

They are mesothermic; They generate heat internally from metabolic processes,
but have much weaker heat regulation compared to most mammals. They do not, for
instance, shiver as a reaction to cold or sweat when overheating. If not
properly attired kobolds will rapidly (as compared to endothermic sentients)
reach a point where they cannot properly regulate their body temperature and
their body will begin to shut down.

They have hands with four fingers and an opposable thumb. They are digitigrades,
walking on the digits of their feet with long carpals and tarsals keeping their
ankles far from the ground like canines. Also like canines, they typically only
have four toes, but their toes tend to be much longer compared to the size of
their legs than canines, much more like birds. Both fingers and toes are clawed,
though most individuals keep their finger claws trimmed neatly for aesthetic and
utilitarian reasons.


### Senses

Kobolds' sense of touch is only slightly muted by their scales and, like most
sentients, their hands, fingers, mouths and reproductive organs are especially
sensitive.

Despite having no external ear structure, their hearing is roughly comparable to
other sentients.

The large pupils and reflective tapetum of kobolds' eyes give them superior low
light vision compared to many sentients, but pitch black still blinds them. They
can also see things that most other sentients cannot. For instance, kobolds
often describe others' dewlaps as reflective or iridescent, while humans see
them as merely brightly colored. For practical purposes, their eyesight is just
as sharp or slightly sharper up close, but at long distances tends slightly
worse than other sentients.

Smell for kobolds is a rich sense highly mixed with taste. They smell through
their large nostrils much as many other creatures do. Their sense of smell is
roughly equivalent to other sentients. They do, however, have a vomeronasal
organ: an additional smell organ in the roof of their mouths that gives them
information about other kobolds around them even if they are out of sight. It
is not uncommon to observe an individual taking short inward huffing breaths
with their tongue shaped to direct the air upward. This maximizes the airflow
against the vomeronasal organ in a way similar to when snakes flick their
tongues. Their sense of taste is also influenced by their vomeronasal organ and
so sometimes they can taste things other sentients cannot.


### Scales & Coloration

Kobolds' skin is covered in scales. Most commonly, these are smooth and shiny,
though they can be rougher on some—especially older—individuals. There is a high
variability in appearance beyond this. As with all other sentients, physical
traits are selected for due to societal concerns and vary across the total
population of the species. Only the most common will be discussed here.

A vast majority of kobolds have spiky protrusions that form crests or ridges
above the eyes, at the top of the head (behind the cerata), along the back of
the head, behind the jaw or combinations of those locations. These tend to be
fairly short, between one quarter to one inch long and are not very sharp.

Coloration can vary widely and is one of the major identifying marks (like skin
and hair color among mammalian sentients). It is also clearly inherited from
parents. For example, some individuals may be entirely a dusty brown perhaps
with a lighter brown ventral side (chin, front of the neck, chest, belly, groin
and underside of the tail) while others might have a busy pattern of one dark
and one bright color and others might be mostly a bright blue or green with red
stripes along their back. These are only a few examples to illustrate the
breadth of variety.

Less common, but still not shocking to find in a kobold population of any size
at all, are individuals with long feathers (generally in the 4-7 inch range).
These will often—but not always—be of similar colors to their scales and most
often form fans or crests at the back and/or top of the head (either around or
on the cerata) or at the tip of the tail. Some fewer feathered individuals
may have feathers about the shoulders, waist, elbow or knee (but only very
rarely at the wrist or ankle, which, remember, is digitigrade and so not near
the ground during locomotion).

Even more rare are individuals whose spiky protrusions continue down the spine
and onto the dorsal side of the tale or onto the face and jaw. These are
generally longer than other kobolds' spikes, ranging from a half inch to two
inches long. While they may look fearsome, they are not very sharp but they
might be useful for a good scratch.

Periodically, a kobold will molt. Molting frequency is driven by growth. A
typical adult will molt roughly every year, whereas children may molt as often
as every two months and elders will molt less and less frequently as they age.
The process takes between 10 and 25 or 30 days.

Like lizards, molting happens in stages, with the outer layer of skin coming off
in patches. Kobolds get very itchy during this period and will scratch at the
dry, old skin. If an individual's claws are not properly maintained (common
among children who are unskilled at trimming their hand claws and whose claws
tend to be sharper), it is possible they will hurt themselves scratching due to
the intense itching. It is common for an individual to use tools and creams to
ease the process and to engage the help of partners in scratching where it is
hard to reach.


### Reproductive Organs

Kobolds' reproductive organs are between their legs, below their bellies and in
front of the anus (which is near the underside of the base of their tails). Most
of the time, all individuals' reproductive organs will look like a slit in the
skin along the midline. During arousal or for urination, this slit expands and
opens revealing, typically, either a vulva or a penis (though of course genetic
variation accounts for less common arrangements). Fertilization is internal,
occurring during sex between two kobolds. In fact, there are some reports that
fertilization may not always be required to bear young, but this is unconfirmed.


### Dewlap

Kobolds have a dewlap on their chin and ventral side of their neck. This is
often a bright, contrasting color from the rest of their body (e.g. a primarily
green kobold may have a red or orange dewlap). Most of the time, the dewlap is
tucked away along the chin and neck and cannot be seen. However, an individual
can extend the dewlap a bit like a fan to display it. This is used in various
social and cultural rituals, for instance related to finding sexual partners,
intimidating foes, or other times of strong emotion. Individuals capable of
laying eggs tend to have somewhat smaller dewlaps than those capable of
fertilizing them.

The dewlap can also change colors, which are generally at least slightly visible
even when the dewlap is relaxed. The color change is driven by the emotional
state of the individual. It only responds to intense emotion and so does not
ruin most kobolds' poker faces and reading the color changes is a subtle skill.
Among individuals who do not know each other well, a rough understanding of each
other's emotional state is possible, say "upset" or "happy". Whereas between
individuals who have known each other for years, it may be possible to
distinguish "embarrassed" from "frustrated" or "content" from "pleasantly
surprised".


### Cerata

Kobolds have two fleshy protuberances on the tops of their heads called cerata
(singular: ceras). They are located above and behind the eyes in a location
similar to canine or feline ears, though they have no involvement in hearing.
They are generally 4-6 inches long in adults and somewhat plump for their
length. They are covered in scales that generally match the rest of the
individuals' head scales, though in feathered individuals, they may also have
feathers.

Their exact biological function is unclear, but they are controllable by an
individual via muscles on top of their head and movement of them is used
expressively in a way that canines' ears or humans' eyebrows often are.


## Physiology

### Locomotion & Other Movement

Kobolds, like most digitigrades, can typically move much more swiftly and
quietly compared to species with other leg limb arrangements. They have a fairly
high endurance, but this can be severely limited by their relatively weak heat
management capability.

Kobolds use their legs and tails when jumping, which appendages tend to have the
greatest muscle mass, and it is common for an individual to be able to jump
their own height. With training, jump heights of 6 to 7 feet are possible.

Kobolds swim primarily with the use of their tail almost like an eel, though
much less efficiently since they lack fins. They can hold their breath, but
their small lung capacity means that most individuals cannot match the endurance
of larger, mammalian sentients such as humans or elves.

Kobolds' climbing ability is only marginally better than other sentients of
similar height. Their claws may aid them in certain situations, depending on the
climbing surface. Their tail is not fully prehensile and so cannot be used to,
e.g. grip a tree branch.


### Nutrition & Diet

A typical adult kobold requires about half as much food per day as an adult
human. While they can subsist purely on grain- and vegetable-based foods for
quite some time, this doesn't result in good health. For good nutrition, adult
kobolds generally need to eat one serving of meat a week at a minimum, though
most also prefer some meat at most meals. This meat can be animal meat (e.g.
deer or beef), fish meat or insect meat.


### Gestation & Development

Kobold young are hatched from eggs. Eggs are laid singly only and a kobold
capable of laying eggs may do so as few as zero or as many as twelve or more
times in their life with zero to three being very common numbers of offspring.
Kobolds capable of laying eggs do not do so except under specific circumstances.

Firstly, not every kobold capable of fertilizing the eggs of another kobold is
capable of doing so with just any kobold capable of laying eggs. Any given
individual is only biologically compatible in such a way with about one third of
the potential population of mates. It is much more complicated than saying that
there are compatible populations A, B and C, but kobolds can tell who they are
or are not biologically compatible with via pheromones. If all other conditions
are met, penetrative sex with a biologically compatible partner will trigger egg
creation (and, barring mishap, that egg will be fertilized).

Secondly, because of the length of gestation within the egg, the egg must be
imbued prior to laying with a incredible amount of nutrients, so the laying
parent must have access to those nutrients themselves in the time leading up to
egg laying. While it is possible that an egg may be formed and laid if
overfeeding doesn't continue all through the period from fertilization to
laying, this risks the health of the egg and embryo.

Thirdly, the environment of the egg laying parent is key. They must remain in a
warm, fairly humid and dark place for roughly the first 90 days after
fertilization and must also not experience high levels of stress. Thereafter,
these things can be foregone without extreme risk, but often the egg laying
parent will have a strong aversion to being outside that environment.

If all of the conditions are right, then it takes 10-12 months for the
fertilized egg to fully form and be prepared to sustain itself outside of the
parent's body.

Once laid, the eggs are spherical, about 6 inches in diameter and the shell is a
thick, leathery material in a grey or milky white shade. It is slightly
translucent and in the right lighting conditions the growing kobold inside can
be seen in vague silhouette.

Gestation within the egg typically takes 16-18 months. Temperature and humidity
regulation of the egg's environment is important at this time to ensure the
health of the embryo. When they are ready, young kobolds use already-sharp hand
and foot claws to cut their way out of their egg, are walking and feeding
themselves within the next day or two and are usually speaking around 8-10
months of age. Kobolds experience rapid growth and frequent molting for the
first 18 to 24 months of life.

Kobolds typically reach sexual maturity between 8 to 12 years of age. Prior to
this, they are considered children. This transition also generally includes a
second period of rapid growth and frequent molting. Some individuals may molt as
often as every two weeks, though this is extreme. Near the end of this period,
most kobolds experience a sharp rise in libido—given that the typical kobold
libido is much higher than other sentients, this level in new adults can be
alarming to outsiders—which often lasts for 12 to 18 months.

After reaching sexual maturity, kobolds' growth and molting frequency greatly
abates and the next significant stage of physical development comes around age 40.
At this point, growth slows even further, with molting coming less and less
frequently, fertility drops significantly, eyesight and bone health may begin to
suffer, etc. This stage lasts until the end of a kobold's life. Lifespans
between 45 and 65 years are typical.


### Disease

Disease among kobolds is quite rare. They are not susceptible to most diseases
that typically affect mammalian sentients. They are, however, extremely
susceptible to a disease whose name translates roughly to "scale rot". This
disease is also known to affect other reptilian sentients and is quite terrible
and contagious.

The early symptoms of scale rot look much like molting and this can often mask
an outbreak, causing the disease to spread quickly and overwhelm a community.
Within a few days, however, the scales begin to blacken and fall away revealing
rotting flesh underneath. Victims may, over time, lose entire appendages and
often must keep themselves bandaged copiously in order to prevent further
complications from infection. If proper mitigation procedures are followed, an
individual may live years after infection, but it is often a difficult life.

Given the virulent nature of the disease, if it is not contained, it may destroy
an entire community. When an outbreak is discovered, rapid and extreme
quarantine procedures are the best way to protect those not already infected.
This can lead to entire parallel communities which interact only in very formal
and careful ways where one is full of those infected and one is full of those
not.
