# Relations with Non-Kobold Cultures

1. [Big People](#big-people)
1. [Dragons](#dragons)

## Big People

Kobolds have a term for societies and cultures dominated by humans, elves,
dwarves, orcs, half-elves, halflings, etc. which more or less translates to "Big
People". Though not all the species that kobolds generally classify as Big
People are actually much bigger than kobolds in size, the label groups them
because of their shared social and cultural ideas, especially ones that differ
from those broadly held by kobolds.  To say that kobolds have a contentious
relationship to the societies of Big People would be an extreme understatement.

Especially societies dominated by humans and elves tend to have extremely
negative views of kobolds. Many consider them to be animals or barely above—a
sort of non-people. Kobolds are treated poorly by most Big People: A sort of
hostile toleration is most common, but it is also not rare for crimes against
kobolds to go unpunished and, indeed, entirely unremarked up to and including
murder.

Among Big People, kobolds have a negative reputation. Some of it is fabricated
by people who benefit from kobolds' place in Big People society, some of it
stems from cultural misunderstandings and a lack of smooth communications
between the groups and some of it is just plain confusion or assumption on the
part of Big People who are entirely unfamiliar with kobolds in any practical
way. For an example of confusion and assumption, see the section on Dragons
below.

An example of a cultural misunderstanding blown out of all proportion is
kobolds' reputation amongst Big People for being thieves. Kobolds do not steal
at any rate higher than other species. In fact, within kobold communities theft
is not really possible, since almost everything is seen as communally owned.
This differing conception of ownership and who has the right to use which items
or resources can lead a kobold unfamiliar with Big People customs to break the
local social mores or laws unknowingly and without malice.

Because of their treatment among Big People, most kobolds range between wary and
distrustful in their interactions with them. Kobolds are often confused and
tripped up by Big People ideas of property, gender, relationships and family.
This can lead many kobolds who must interact with Big People for one reason or
another to act in preemptive self defense and either assume they are going to be
targeted for harassment and theft or to even use violence as a way to prevent
violence against themselves. This is often not popular amongst the Big People
they interact with.

This latter also explains much of the kobold-instigated violence against Big
People at the community level. A kobold community may identify a new, nearby
settlement of Big People, for example, as an existential threat because of past
poor experiences with Big People and decide that rather than waiting for the
problem to come to them in the form of armed parties killing and robbing their
way through the community that they should use violence and destruction to
convince the Big People to settle elsewhere.

All of this being said, there are always some kobolds who are interested in or
even fascinated by Big People and their lives. These kobolds tend to self-select
for duties and roles for when their community needs or wants to interact with
Big People. It is not entirely unheard of for such individuals to spend lengthy
amounts of time among Big People and even enter into romantic and/or sexual
relationships with Big People. As can be imagined, such relationships are
complicated and involve much working out of cultural ideas as well as biological
compatibilities. On that topic, it should be noted that no offspring from such a
coupling has ever been recorded and it is likely that none will given the
extreme differences in biology between kobolds and mammalian Big People.

Very much less common are Big People who decide to spend extended time visiting
or living with Kobolds. Most species would find the spaces unmanageably small,
and, further, given the political and cultural dominance of Big People, it
simply benefits Big People far less to understand kobolds than it does for
kobolds to understand Big People, so incredibly few Big People put in the
effort.


## Dragons

It is important, given the probable audience of this document, to begin by
saying that the relationship between kobolds and dragons exists primarily in the
minds of Big People, rather than in verifiable fact.

In a biological sense, kobolds and dragons share some common features, but also
many dissimilarities. Rather than the idea that one evolved from the other, it
is more probable that they had a common ancestor in some far distance time. It
also seems unlikely that kobolds were created by dragons any more than it might
seem that giants created halflings. These theories exist mostly because Big
People with only passing familiarities with dragons and kobolds made assumptions
based on surface similarities and repeated them, rather than sound research and
scholarship.

As to documented accounts of dragons and kobolds "working together", further
investigation shows that the events described have at least some basis in fact,
but an imprecise understanding of the reality. It seems that sometimes a kobold
community will enter into a relationship with a dragon for various reasons most
often because the dragon pledges protection from nearby Big People communities
that have been or might become a threat to the kobold community. This may also
in part be influenced by the Big People association of the two species and the
idea that if nearby Big People will assume a kobold community is working for or
with a nearby dragon they may as well get some benefit from it.

Another common—which word must be understood within the context of a general
situation which is itself actually very rare—pattern is that a dragon will
subjugate a kobold community with violence and the threat thereof for its own
ends. For example, because they are incredibly nutrient rich, some dragons
consider kobold eggs to be a delicacy.

Whatever the inciting mechanism, it seems the results are almost universally the
same: the kobold community becomes subject to the dragon, the standard of living
plummets, the communal culture of support erodes and the kobolds that survive
under such conditions rue the day they met their draconic overseer. Stories of
the fates of such communities circulate among kobolds and so most communities
are extremely reluctant to deal with dragons under any circumstances.
