# Kobold Society

1. [Community](#community)
   1. [Politics](#politics)
   1. [Peace, War & Conflict](#peace-war--conflict)
   1. [Economics](#economics)
   1. [Religion](#religion)
1. [Family, Gender & Sexuality](#family-gender--sexuality)
   1. [Sex](#sex)
   1. [Gender](#gender)
   1. [Sexual & Romantic Relationships](#sexual--romantic-relationships)
   1. [Family](#family)
1. [Language](#language)
1. [Culture](#culture)
   1. [Art](#art)
   1. [Dress](#dress)
   1. [Pranks](#pranks)
1. [Leisure](#leisure)
1. [Health, the Body & Death](#health-the-both--death)
1. [Education & Academia](#education--academia)
1. [Laws & Justice](#laws--justice)
1. [Ecology](#ecology)


## Community

Kobold communities are communities in the truest sense. Being small and weak
compared to most other sentients, there is little hope that any single kobold
will have the might to protect their home. But kobold communities generally do
not rely on individual action to protect and sustain themselves. Instead they
tend towards communalistic or even anarchistic modes of organization.

Every member of the community seeks support from and gives support to the people
around them. Most kobolds are very communally minded, prefer cooperation and
tend towards a sort of casual selflessness. This doesn't mean that kobolds
regularly martyr themselves for the good of their families and community, but
that in small, everyday ways it is often the communal good that weighs heavier
than their individual personal desires when making choices.


### Politics

Kobold communities may not be organized the way most Big People communities are,
but this doesn't mean they lack politics. Deciding what a community should do is
often a messy, lengthy affair with different households or individuals giving
speeches, holding debates, exhorting their fellow community members or getting
into yelling matches.

Decisions are generally made once the community has reached a rough consensus
that everyone's voice and opinion has been represented and either the general
consensus of what to do thereafter prevails or some voting process is invoked.
Some communities have more or less complex traditions around this voting ranging
from every community member (sometimes even including children) voting to some
arrangement of rolling representation up by household or neighborhood.

One downside of not having official governmental structures is that individuals
with especially strong personalities or who are particularly charismatic may
have undue and deleterious effect on the decisions of the community. Sometimes
this is mitigated by kobolds' general dislike of central and powerful
authorities, but sometimes it is not.


### Peace, War & Conflict

lkewjflkje flj


### Economics

It is a rare kobold community that uses a currency of any kind internally.
Instead, work that needs to be done and the distribution of resources are
managed more directly. The goal is that every member of the community has the
access they need to the resources that the community can provide them and every
member of the community contributes to those resources as best they can.

This often means that individuals will change roles or trades within the
community depending on what the community needs. Very rarely is someone forced
to undertake a trade they don't want to, but very often will individuals choose
to take on such a task because they see it as part of the social contract of
community membership.

Some communities do maintain a rotation system for the least popular work,
mostly to do with sanitation and maintenance of the community's infrastructure.
Often serving a rotation doing this work is rewarded with small material
benefits and even if not, serving extra rotations is a good way to earn
community trust.

Some kobold communities do often maintain a store of currency or valuables
recognized by nearby Big People communities so that if they needed to trade with
them for resources not otherwise available, it would be possible. But trade like
this is a foreign concept for many kobolds and so it is just as common for a
community to have no such store.


### Religion

lwekfj lefkjw


## Family, Gender & Sexuality

### Sex

Sex among kobolds is not always for reproduction and, in fact, is more often
than not for social reasons. In fact, as will be discussed more below, sex
between individuals who are incapable of producing young together is much more
common than sex between those who can. Kobolds, like most sentients, also
consider a wide variety of acts to be part of sex which can include any
non-reproductive organ or body part, most commonly: mouths, hands, tongues,
tails, cerata and anuses.


### Gender

Kobolds generally do not construe of gender the same way that Big People
cultures around them do. They draw a distinction between kobolds capable of
producing eggs and, therefore, young and those who are incapable, but this is
not seen to have a large impact on gender roles in most kobold communities.

Instead, they conceive of a space defined by three gender role archetypes and
individuals often find their own balance between these archetypes or even move
freely around in the space over time. The archetypes are complex and have much
history and subtlety which is beyond the scope of this text to cover, but,
roughly, there is one that embodies leadership, decision-making and force of
personality, one that embodies caring, nurturing and organizing and one that
embodies energetic action, spontaneity and creative thinking.


### Sexual & Romantic Relationships

Kobold romantic relationships are also very dissimilar from Big People romantic
relationships. Kobolds form households, which are groups of adults who have
agreed to live together and form their own micro-community within their larger
community. These may be as small as two or as many as six or eight (larger
households do occur, but are not very common at all).

In general, most members of a household will have some kind of sexual and/or
romantic relationship with most of the other members of the household. Members
of the households will often occupy varying places within kobold gender space.
There seems to be one fairly rigid cultural norm that members of the same
household should not be able to produce young together. Which is to say that
households, for the vast majority, will be either entirely made of up egg-laying
kobolds or those who cannot lay eggs.

It is also extremely common for kobolds to have romantic and sexual
relationships outside of their households. These relationships may even be
stronger and more longer-lasting than those within their households. These
extra-household relationships are how eggs become fertilized, but that is by far
not the only context in which they exist.

In general, kobolds are much more comfortable and casual about sex and other
physical intimacy than most Big People cultures. Casual, low-stakes sex between
new acquaintances is not uncommon. Similarly, displays of physical intimacy
including sex are not seen as something to be hidden, so public displays of
affection up to and including intercourse are not rare. Often the more involved
acts are not conducted in central, highly visible locations, but this seems to
be mostly a matter of pragmatics: No one wants to trip over an amorous and
oblivious pile of kobolds.

Even greetings between individuals who do not have established sexual or
romantic relationships display a high degree of physical intimacy compared to
most Big People. Hugging, nuzzling and cuddling are extremely common behaviors
even between acquaintances and touching of hands, shoulders, arms or faces is
common when meeting strangers. Tail caresses (of others' tails, legs and feet),
in particular, can convey much nuance between kobolds with subtle adjustments
being used to convey the difference between a friendly, collegial greeting, a
suggestion of the possibility of sex or the greeting of a romantic partner after
a long time apart.

Such casual physical contact is near-constant among individuals who know each
other well. Groups working together, for instance, say cooking within a
household or working in a craft shop will constantly bump each other at the hip,
touch tail to foot, touch each other's arms in passing, etc. It is often a
reflexive and subconscious act for many individuals.

One note of interest is that kobolds do not kiss the way most mammalian Big
People do. However, they do often engage in playful nipping. Their teeth are
sharp, but their scales protect them from much harm. The biting is not confined
to any particular body part and anything that other normal contact brings near
the mouth is a potential target.


### Family

Given all of the above, family among kobolds is a complicated and confusing
topic for most Big People. There are many words for the different ways an
individual is related to others which capture different flavors of familial
relationship (your birth mother's housemate who cared for you in the hatchery,
your birth father's other children by different mothers, your lover's
housemate's child, etc.), but it is also very important to kobolds.

Kobolds read family broadly and in a sense everyone in a community considers
themselves family. Among family, displays of affection in celebration, mourning,
reunion or simply to show love are often large group affairs that range from a
scrum of hugging and nuzzling to full orgies, sometimes with one leading into
another.

Eggs are cared for communally in a hatchery and generally by a group of trained,
dedicated kobolds leading the task. This is in part due to the lengthy gestation
period of young within the egg and the strict environmental requirements for a
healthy egg, but also because birth parents nearly always reside separately.

Once hatched, children are not considered to be members of a household, but live
in special child-only housing (the name of which roughly means "place where the
children are watched over or protected", but "younghold" is much more pithy)
where, again, trained and dedicated caregivers are nearby. Young kobolds are
aware, however, of who their birth parents are and often spend time in and with
their parents' households forming relationships with their parents' housemates
and their lovers and friends, etc. Choosing to form or join a household is seen
as a major rite of passage and generally happens near when an individual reaches
physical maturity (generally between the ages of 8 and 12).

It is not unheard of for a kobold to leave a household and join or form a new
one with others, but it is seen as a socially significant event and so is not
done often or lightly. Most often such a step is taken due to an individual
moving to a new community or feeling like they have reached a new stage in life.

Older kobolds (lifespans are typically 45-65 years) will sometimes "retire" from
their household and form new ones or, if a household has tended towards higher
ages, merge with other households of individuals of similar ages. These
households often hold a special place in kobold communities. Children will spend
time learning from the community's elders and problems faced by the community
will be put before them for advice. While many kobold communities do not have a
single leader and some lack even an official council, households of elders often
play these roles informally.


## Language

Kobolds are capable of learning and speaking the languages of most other
sentients, but due to distinct anatomy along their vocal tracts, most other
sentients cannot learn to speak kobolds' native languages (though with training
they may be able to learn to understand such languages). As with all species,
there are many different kobold cultures and languages thus vary across them.
However, the most widely spoken language among kobold communities is Chrqrryip.

To begin with, understand that the sounds of languages invented by Big People
are possible, but not the most comfortable for most kobolds. The easiest sounds
for them to make have more in common with small dogs, birds and lizards.
Sometimes Big People will characterize kobold speech as sounding like a dingo, a
crow and a pigeon having an argument.

Also, there is no writing system widely agreed upon across the Chrqrryip
speaking community. The vast majority of kobolds do not write their own language
or use a simple system of pictographs, rather than an alphabet. Much kobold
writing is done using borrowed writing systems from other languages that are
popular nearby. Most culturally important kobold history or stories are passed
on verbally in the form of song or epic poetry (see below).

Therefore, the spelling "Chrqrryip" is not universally used and is, at best, a
vague approximation to help a non-kobolds make roughly the correct sounds. The
first syllable, spelled "chr," is the most straightforward. It is a voiceless
postalveolar afficate followed by a syllabic R-like sound. For kobolds, this
R-like sound is almost a purr in the back of the throat, but even kobolds with
very little exposure to Big People would recognize this sound if the speaker
made the sound /tʃɹ̩/.

The second syllable, spelled "qrr", is much trickier. It is a sound most like
the low cooing that pigeons sometimes make. The vocal tract of most species of
Big People is wholly incapable of making this sound, so Big People scholars of
kobold culture often best approximate it with either a voiceless uvular or
voiceless velar stop followed by a syllabic voiced alveolar trill: /qr̩/ or /kr̩/.

The final syllable, spelled "yip", is a high pitched sound like might be made by
a small canine. There are many variations in sounds like this that kobolds can
differentiate while most Big People's ears are not well trained to distinguish
them (let alone reproduce with their vocal tracts). So most Big People do their
best and hope any kobold listeners will give them the benefit of the doubt.

Just looking at the name of this one, very common language should give an idea
of the phonetic texture of kobold languages and names. Many kobolds that
interact regularly with Big People will adopt a second name for use by Big
People that is easier for them to pronounce. This may be a name from a nearby
Big People culture or a non-name word from a Big People language or just an
approximation of their native name with the sounds adapted for non-kobold vocal
tracts.


## Culture

### Art

Kobold culture, of course, varies widely across the world, just like that of any
other sentient species. However there are common themes: Kobolds tend not to
revere individual folk heroes or leaders, but instead tend to tell stories of
communities coming together to solve problems. There are also many, many stories
of kobolds being victimized or attacked by Big People (with a strong historical
basis). Songs on themes of romance and sex are also very common. Since most
kobolds do not read or write, almost all of these stories are conveyed through
lengthy, verbally communicated epic poems or by song.

Instruments among kobolds often vary widely from community to community. They
may acquire instruments from Big People communities nearby or build imitations
of them at more fitting sizes. Traditional Kobold music (largely passed down
from before major contact with other sentients) is largely vocal and drum-based
with drums of various sizes from a few inches to 6-7 feet in diameter. These
drums might be played with hands or tails or rods about two kobold fingers in
diameter and one kobold forearm in length.

Artwork among kobold cultures tends to depict stories and cultural events and be
narrative in structure with a series of events depicted with time flowing from
one side to another of the piece. Often these works are seen as more important
for their connection to the history of the species or community than their
intrinsic artistic beauty, so they may be very crude. Some individuals, of
course, are more talented than others and so great detail is not unheard of.
Also, due to the influence of differing ideas about art from nearby Big People
cultures, sometimes a community may produce art more comparable to those
cultures' art.


### Dress

As with most sentients, kobolds like shiny objects and often adorn their bodies
with jewelry and piercings of metal and gems. It is also common to wear head,
ceras, neck, arm, wrist, leg or ankle bands of leather with beads and/or
feathers.

Kobold clothing is often light and minimalist. While fashion obviously varies
over time and geography, a staple of many wardrobes are short skirts, front-only
loin clothes and open-front vests. Many kobolds go shirtless. If climate or
tasks dictate, however, kobolds will wear protective gear such as armor, leather
aprons, heavy coats, etc. just like any reasonable person. Kobolds generally do
not wear footwear except in such circumstances as well.


### Pranks

Another interesting aspect common to many Kobold cultures are prank wars.
Because they are small and weak relative to most other sentients, they tend to
want to automate the defense of their homes with multiple, layered and elaborate
systems of traps. This is seen as a community-wide endeavor and so all
individuals spend time creating and maintaining the trap systems for their
communities. As rehearsal for this, even from a young age, kobolds are
encouraged to build non-lethal traps for each other. These can lead to
good-natured rivalries lasting years that make Big People pranks like a full
bucket sitting on top of a slightly-ajar door look absolutely pedestrian.


## Leisure

qlkfdj qfelkj f


## Health, the Body & Death

qlkdj qlfkj qw


## Education & Academia

Because of the central place that spoken poetry and song plays in kobold
culture, the roles of singers and story tellers are very prestigious. Kobolds
generally do not have centers of learning like Big People universities or
schools, but these bards also play the role of academics. They lead the teaching
of the community (both children and adults) and the reproduction of their
community's culture from generation to generation.

These bards are also the most likely kobolds to venture out into the wider world
in search of knowledge and thus be encountered by Big People. They do not often
comport themselves the way most Big People expect academics and scholars to
comport themselves; formality is not a very common trait of kobold cultures.


## Laws & Justice

Most kobold communities have very few laws if any. The common theme among them
tends to be that letting down or failing the community when it could be avoided
is seen as a transgression. This is not used to punish individuals who need
support from the community. That would violate core tenets of kobold values.
Instead it is a way to reinforce that those who can support the community do, so
that those who the community needs to support can be so supported.

Transgressions between individuals tend to be handled with community-led
mediation. Sometimes individuals must be separated (for instance in the case of
interpersonal violence), but both the transgressor and the transgressed will
generally receive support.

Similarly, if an individual has transgressed against the community at large,
they are often not punished in a sense that would look familiar to most Big
People, but receive counseling and guidance. They may have actions taken against
them that are not to their liking, but imprisonment or other confinement is
extremely rare.

As an example, if a community were going through a period of food scarcity and
an individual was found to be hoarding food without some special need, along
with receiving counseling (likely on the theme of supporting the community and
being supported by it), the food they had hoarded would be returned to the
community to be shared out by whatever system was currently in place. The
transgressor, however, would still be supported by the community and would not
go hungry themselves (any more than the rest of the community was).

Only in the most extreme cases do most kobold communities resort to something
that looks like actual punishment (as opposed to efforts to rehabilitate). In
these cases, a transgressor will be subjected to a ritual shunning. This may be
permanent or may be for a proscribed length of time. They are not exiled from
the community, but other community members will not interact with them, look at
them or speak to them. They will still receive material support from the
community (in that they may partake of food and shelter), but for all but the
most basic needs, they are on their own. Apparently, the lack of near-constant
physical touch is the thing that wears most often on those shunned and the
psychological toll that long-term shunning can have due to the lack of physical
contact can be severe.

## Ecology

Kobolds tend to prefer warmer climates, so kobold communities are much more
numerous in arid, tropical and temperate regions. They also tend (for reasons
discussed below) to found communities that are out of the way of Big People,
either far or hidden from dense Big People communities or travel routes.

Kobolds like to live underground, often in natural cave systems that they expand
or shape slightly. This is especially true for communities in cooler regions and
at higher elevations. They do not, however, tend to the deep and elaborate
excavation that is typical of dwarves.

Even kobold communities that are founded above-ground tend to mimic caves in
that they will be very few buildings with many interconnected rooms and the
buildings may be connected by tunnels.

Whatever the material, most kobold communities consider all structures or cave
space to be communally owned. A given home is seen as being used by a household
at any given time, but not owned by them. Certain large structural changes and
the like are often subject to community approval. To contrast this with some Big
People neighborhoods with a controlling council, those changes, once endorsed by
the community, will also be undertaken at the community level. If a household
wants to expand to make room for some new members, the work will often be
quickly agreed to and then executed by people across the community.
